- Welcome to this evening's Ask Your Ob-Doctor.
My name's Andrew Murray.
- My name's Sarah Johanna Sun Murray.
- For those of you who perhaps have never listened
to the shows, they run every third Friday of the month
from 7 p.m. to 8 p.m.
We have call-in from 7.30 until 8 o'clock.
And once again, we have our very special guest speaker
who's full of information about current events
as well as historically accurate, important past events.
So that brings it into context for all of us.
You're listening to KMUD Garville 91.1 FM
and from 7.30 until the end of the show,
like I said, we're asking callers,
call in with any questions either related or related
to this month's loose topic on stress, GABA systems,
different herbs that combat stress in different ways,
mitochondrial support, and Dr. Peat will be bringing
his wisdom and his expertise in terms of mitochondrial
activity and how that all plays in with the hormones
and other substances like thyroid, progesterone,
pregnenolone, et cetera, that all support
the anti-inflammatory cascade, as it were,
that battles the inflammation that most people
just constantly under attack with.
We are going through a pledge drive this evening,
so sorry for those people who perhaps waited,
thinking it was starting at seven.
It's just started just now.
So it's all good.
So without this radio show, this kind of program
would not be on the air.
So those people that are listening,
there is a pledge drive going on.
It's basically a supported network of people,
volunteers, and donors that keep this radio station
independent and make just this kind of show possible
because you're not gonna hear too much of what we say
and too much of what other people have to say
in their various programmings from regular broadcast.
It's not controlled mainstream media, folks.
It's the alternative.
So please support it wherever and however you can.
So like I said, this evening, Dr. Raymond Peat's joining us
and hopefully he's with us on the VIP line.
Are you there, Dr. Peat?
- Yes, hi.
- Thanks so much for joining us again
and sharing your wisdom and giving your time
as freely as you do.
I really appreciate it.
Thank you.
As usual, I think it's always very good
to just outline your professional and academic background.
So people who perhaps have never listened to the show,
or heard you even before, can hear your background.
And I know when they hear you speak,
they know you know what you're talking about.
But if you can just say a little bit about your background
and your past, that'd be great to illuminate.
- Okay, after 10 or 15 years of working in language
and literature, I have shifted over to biology
and especially aging and metabolism reproduction.
Studying at the University of Oregon 1968 to '72
for a biology PhD.
- Okay, so I know we've heard a lot about you in the past
in terms of thyroid, your specialty with thyroid hormone,
physiology, explaining the mechanisms by which
you have come to see thyroid activity within the body,
as well as, like you mentioned, progesterone and pregnenolone
and the aging that is one of your specialties.
In terms of what we're gonna get into this evening
with a loose connection to the topic of mitochondria
and their job in the body, what they do, how they operate,
what things decrease their activity,
and how they are slowly deactivated and the substances
that deactivate them over time with aging.
I think, can I just start with GABA.
There's a compound called GABA,
it's an inhibitory neurotransmitter.
And I know there's some herbs that I'd like to link that to
as we get on with this discussion about things
that stimulate the nervous system,
things that help it to relax, and what that relaxation is
as opposed to the excitotoxic effect of stress.
So in terms of GABA, what do you wanna say, Sarah?
- Well, I just wanted to ask Dr. Peat
if you can explain simply what the mitochondria is
in the cell and the power.
I've been told it's the powerhouse of the cell.
And can you please explain that to our listeners
in case people might not know what mitochondria is?
- That's a good enough definition, I think,
but there's a very stereotyped textbook-y definition of it
that it consists of a certain kind of membrane
and special enzymes and some DNA separate from the nucleus.
And it handles various functions
other than energy production,
but steroid synthesis is one of its very important functions.
It converts cholesterol to pregnenolone, progesterone,
and those turn into all of the steroid hormones.
- So is that why people, when they age,
their cholesterol goes up because their mitochondria
isn't as efficient in converting
the cholesterol into those hormones?
- Yeah, and thyroid is the main hormone
that activates the oxidative metabolism
of the mitochondrion.
And so if your thyroid is low,
the mitochondria don't pull in the cholesterol
and turn it to pregnenolone.
And the other cofactor working with thyroid
happens to be vitamin A.
And that protein in the blood carries thyroid
and vitamin A on a single protein
and delivers it to the mitochondria over there
like a factory with a conveyor belt
bringing in the raw materials and the catalysts.
- And that's how they make the hormones
because the cholesterol plus the vitamin A
makes progesterone and-
- Yeah, the vitamin A is involved in steroid formation
in not only the gonads and the adrenals,
but also in the brain and the skin.
The skin and the brain are major steroid endocrine glands.
- So every cell in our body has a mitochondria
and does its job in that particular part of the body.
But if you don't have adequate thyroid,
then you won't be getting adequate oxygen
into that mitochondria and basic energy production
of that cell and cellular function will be decreased.
- Yeah, red blood cells don't have mitochondria.
They depend on sugar for their energy, glucose.
- Okay, just quickly getting onto,
I just caught on what you said.
I know in the past you've always mentioned it
and I think people who perhaps have heard you speak
and have listened to you would begin to understand
that the physiological explanations of membranes
is pretty flawed.
When I was studying-
- That includes the textbook definition
of what a mitochondrion is and how it works.
They use a membrane
and what they call the chemiosmotic hypothesis.
- Okay.
- And the membrane has to have certain
kind of metaphysical, physical properties.
And if you look at a real cell oxidizing,
it turns out that the outer surface of the cell
has mitochondrial-like properties.
The same enzyme reactions using oxygen
and consuming electrons happens right at the surface
of the cell as well as in the mitochondrion.
- So the whole supposition
that the membrane is a cohesive barrier
and it's not fluid, it's not dynamic,
it's very much a skin,
which is the way I always understood,
was told to understand membranes.
- And with channels.
- And with channels and pumps and all the rest of it.
- And what about all the organelles?
Is that completely bogus as well?
- They are suspected to be artifacts of fixation largely,
but things are differentiated.
But when you kill them and take out the water
and harden them and slice them,
things don't look the way they did when they were alive.
- So is there no way they can look at the cell
while it's alive?
- Yeah.
People have done an atlas of the brain, for example,
slicing the brain and freezing it and making pictures
and then doing the standard fixation
where you get a nice sharp image.
Their size is tremendously different.
The internal structure, of course, is different too.
- Well, don't the fixatives change the structure
as well though?
- Yeah.
Harold Hillman is probably the person most famous
for challenging conventional biology,
saying that everything is an artifact of fixation.
- What about the live microscopy?
- Yeah, where you use a fluorescent stain, for example.
You can see very amazing things,
things swirling around and doing things
that are fairly parallel to the theoretical descriptions,
but sometimes the structures seem to be
more like a whirlwind than an organelle.
In the 1940s, when radioactive isotopes became available,
the whole idea of the barrier membrane was eliminated.
Gilbert Ling reviews the history of that,
but there is no barrier to sodium, for example.
It just slips in and out of the cell.
- 'Cause I was always taught about the sodium potassium ATP
eggs which needed a molecule of ATP to pump in
and pump out a molecule of sodium and potassium in return.
- Yeah, but if you take a hair which is perfectly dead
and wash out the minerals and then dip it in blood serum
or plasma, you get the same unequal distribution
of the minerals, potassium inside and sodium outside.
And it's exactly the same principle as a water softener
where you charge it with sodium
and then it removes calcium from the hard water.
A man named Meiselt wrote a book on things including
the physics of water softeners and he recognized
Gilbert Ling's work in biology as the best explanation
for how a water softener works.
The physics was so good in describing cells
that even physicists recognized that it worked
for something as common as a water softener.
But biologists just don't like that way of looking at cells.
It tends to leave out a lot of their favorite beliefs
about genes and so on.
- Is that where the word Meiselt was coined from?
- No.
- No, okay.
- Just a funny coincidence.
- All right, you're listening to Ask Your Obdoctor,
K. E. Meadie Galbraith, 91.1 FM.
From 7.30 to the end of the show, eight o'clock,
you're invited to call in with questions related
or unrelated to this month's topic
of mitochondria, energy production,
and we're gonna cover things like valerian and rhodiola,
schizandra and ginseng as typical herbs
that have plenty of scientific data
and pharmacological data to support their effects
in supporting mitochondria and in energy production
and mediating the negative effects of stress.
A number if you live in the area is 923-3911.
If you're outside of the area,
there's a toll-free number, which is 1-800-KMUD-RAD.
Those people listening to us on the web,
that toll-free number's a good number to call.
If you have any questions, either related or unrelated,
and Dr. Peat is joining us again this month.
We are going through a pledge drive, folks.
Those people who perhaps have just tuned in,
K. E. Meadie Galbraith, 91.1,
conducting one of our several pledge drives
that go on through the year to raise finances
to keep this great show on the air
and to keep other shows on the air, not just this one.
I didn't mean this great show, but great shows on the air.
- This great station.
- Yeah, this great station that actually brings out
a lot of very alternative information to people
that's not mainstream.
You probably won't find this kind of stuff
too many other places, so keep it alive
because it's rapidly disappearing in this country.
Okay, so Dr. Peat, you mentioned
that there was a single protein
which carries vitamin A and cholesterol.
If you know the name of the protein, great,
but otherwise, do you know if there's anything
that would be supportive to that protein?
That seems like a fairly key intermediary in that process.
- It's the low-density lipoprotein
that delivers cholesterol and then prealbumin
or transthyretin, which transports the thyroid
and vitamin A.
- Which is why it'd be so dangerous to have a low LDL,
which is what most doctors call the bad cholesterol.
- It's a good one because it brings us stuff
to make progesterone out of.
- Okay, good, so people, did you get that?
Once again, it's just another call to arms, as it were,
that cholesterol is not the enemy.
So the LDL cholesterol, which is always coined
as the bad cholesterol, is actually the cholesterol
that chaperones these very important molecules
to enable things like steroid synthesis to occur.
So without cholesterol, you'd be in bad shape.
Another fact, I think, I just, I coined,
I heard this coined not too long ago,
was that the brain's white matter is 95% cholesterol.
So if cholesterol's not important,
then why is the brain 95% cholesterol?
- Well, that's why they did that study in older people
who had low cholesterol were much more prone to dementia.
- And Dr. Peat, just to let people know, again,
you always advocate a cholesterol should be
between 180 and 200, that's quite healthy,
and also after 50 years of age,
you should be slightly over 200.
- Yeah, according to the Framingham study,
people over 50 who weren't above 200 in their cholesterol
were more likely to have dementia.
- Yeah, okay.
All right, so let's move on to some of those things
that have been written about and recorded,
and pharmacology's been provided,
and scientific background's been explained
for the action of, but I know that you probably have
some other ways of tying in what perhaps we were taught
when we were studying how these things worked.
So perhaps filarium root is one of those herbs
that a lot of people would have used,
would have heard about, and have tried,
and certainly would have gotten benefits
for either insomnia or anxiety as a mild sedative.
And I was always told that its main attribute
was that it provided GABA and prevented the breakdown,
so the valeranic acid was actually responsible
for inhibiting the breakdown of GABA as well.
What do you know about GABA as a neurotransmitter,
and how do you feel about valerian's use
being warranted, given what I've said?
- I think valerian also increases the activity
of the enzyme that converts the excitatory glutamic acid
into the inhibitory GABA, so it does just about everything
needed to protect the brain, increasing GABA,
and the effect of GABA.
And GABA is, the system called the GABA receptor
is probably the most complex bunch of proteins
that has the name receptor.
Many different things affect it in different ways.
Valerian, or valium, the specific molecule,
apparently binds to it in a way similar to GABA,
and in a slightly different way than progesterone,
pregnenolone, and probably the androgens of some types.
And even carbon dioxide probably is involved
in binding in some way near this so-called receptor,
stabilizing a whole system of proteins
to turn off the excitatory process in the cell.
- Yeah, it's a very excitation.
I think when people hear the word,
we need to support its definition.
Excitatory is a very wasteful situation
or state to be in, isn't it?
When in terms of the cell being excited,
I think for very short-term activity, that's not a problem,
but the excitation in general when it's longer term
is actually very detrimental to the cell.
- Yeah, that's what causes brain fatigue
if you stay awake too long.
And if you don't have a good supply of glucose
producing carbon dioxide, for example,
you more quickly get into the fatigued state.
Glucose, one of its functions is actually
to substantially contribute to the formation of GABA,
the part of glucose molecule is involved in the synthesis,
but also the carbon dioxide stabilizes it.
And when the glutamic acid is converted into GABA,
it also releases carbon dioxide
that helps with the inhibitory process.
So oxidative metabolism in the brain
is doing many things, producing GABA
and progesterone, pregnenolone, carbon dioxide,
and keeping down the excitatory things,
lactic acid, nitric oxide,
glucamic acid, pneumonia, for example.
- Well, it's estimated that 10% of people
respond to valerian in the opposite way
that you would want them to,
and they actually get excited from taking valerian,
almost like cats do when they get around it.
Can you possibly explain why that might be happening?
- No, not at all.
- Yeah, 'cause there are some people
that definitely give feedback of,
oh, it woke me up, it didn't help me sleep and relax,
actually it had the opposite effect.
- Yeah, it stimulated me, it made me feel jittery.
- Anyway, it's not a big deal.
Okay, so I wanted also to bring out
that St. John's wort is another herb
that's posited to be a reuptake inhibitor of GABA,
and that compound was shown to be hyperforin,
which was one of the actives that are sometimes standardized
in terms of making a standardized extract of St. John's.
And then I also found some evidence here
to show that lemon balm was shown to be
a GABA transaminase inhibitor,
so that is it blocks the enzyme GABA transaminase,
which converts GABA to a compound
called succinic semialdehyde and glutamate.
So all of these reactions are reversible
for very obvious reasons,
and the body obviously has a very fine tune
in order to keep this whole homeostasis running properly
and preventing over-excitation and over-restfulness,
somnambulance almost in some ways.
I did read the article on mitochondrial disease.
There's a known syndrome of it,
and one of its main downsides,
obviously it's a complete downside having a syndrome,
but one of the main downsides
is the kind of somnambulance that you get with it
where people just either getting seizures
and just being completely unable to perform.
- In terms of keeping that balance
between the GABA-ergic side of keeping things stable
and calm, are we even to think of that
as being the optimum state
and that actually it's like thyroid
where thyroid itself is not at all a stimulant,
it actually helps you relax,
helps the cell repolarize and re-energize
its resting potential?
- I call that the high-energy resting state
in which the cells all through the body,
especially in the brain,
have so much energy that they're ready to do anything.
But when you get very fatigued,
they lack the energy needed
to replenish that work-ready condition,
and so they are in sort of a hypersensitive state.
A agitated condition.
Their voltage, so-called resting voltage,
goes very low and they stay in a more or less
constantly excited but unable to work condition.
And magnesium is one of the things
that helps to restore the relaxed state.
Thyroid helps you to retain magnesium.
Magnesium stabilizes the high-energy ATP molecule,
and without thyroid you can't make that very quickly.
And so if you have adequate thyroid-producing
oxidative energy and producing ATP,
that causes the cell to retain magnesium,
and that complex of things holds the cell
in a ready-to-work state with lots of reserve energy.
Simply a magnesium deficiency will cause seizures,
insomnia, inflammation,
everything that a lack of energy leads to.
- So do you think then it's very important to,
and I'm saying this because I understand
that this is the way, but just for our listeners,
to have small amounts of sugars, foods regularly
so that your body's energy supply is constantly stocked
rather than going four, six hours or more without food
and then having a loaded meal
in terms of keeping mitochondria as happy as possible
rather than allowing them to get depleted
to a point where they're no longer really able
to bounce back or for you to be able
to pick up again relatively quickly?
- And the B vitamins are essential
for using oxygen efficiently in the mitochondria.
- Okay. - Vitamin B1, biotin B2.
- Okay, all right.
So what about melatonin?
Let's move on to melatonin as a substance
that I've read quite a few articles,
some of which have been very disturbing,
I must admit, and we'll get into that in a little bit,
but I know most of the advertising for melatonin
is very pro-sleeping, pro-relaxing.
They don't say anything dangerous about it.
It's naturally produced.
It is found in different products from foods,
liquids and foodstuffs.
So it's a fairly ubiquitous chemical.
It obviously has a very specific function.
It really does work physiologically and it's very important,
but what's your impression of melatonin
in terms of its use and whether or not
you feel comfortable around it?
- Well, I think the good side of it
is that in the fatigued state of the brain,
the excitatory de-energized condition,
nitric oxide rises and starts a vicious circle
in which it activates acetylcholine,
which activates nitric oxide synthesis
and it rises and can keep you awake.
And melatonin is effective at turning off that cycle.
So when your brain is in a bad, fatigued state,
melatonin can protect it by getting down
the nitric oxide and excitation.
- But wouldn't that be like in a small dose
or is it different for every patient?
- Yeah, one publication refers to the physiological dose,
which would be equivalent in an average sized adult
to five micrograms per body.
An ultra small amount would replenish your whole body.
Others have measured it as up to maybe two or three
milligrams in the whole body
as a physiological concentration.
So when a person takes 10 milligrams for sure,
it will put them to sleep,
but it probably is doing lots of other things.
And in the antioxidant experiments
or the radiation protection experiments,
they've used something like a thousand
or maybe a million times the concentration
that exists physiologically.
So it can do amazing things
like protect you against gamma rays.
But if you do that more than during
or shortly after the exposure,
the outcome might have unexpected consequences.
It was only in the later 1990s
when the material became very cheap and widely sold
that all of this amazing stuff about being
a little anti-cancer, anti-stress, anti-inflammatory,
issue protecting against everything,
all of these studies came out by the thousands.
But when I was in graduate school,
it wasn't even certain that melatonin
was the main pineal hormone.
And what was known was that the pineal extract
had very specific effects
that imitated nighttime and winter.
And in the winter, all animals from fish,
turtles, lizards, rats, sheep, and so on,
everyone's reproductive system
shrinks away during the winter.
Some species can manage to reproduce in the winter,
but in general, it's a principle
that not only the gonads regress,
but the thymus gland regresses
in all of these different types of animals.
And the thymus atroviar involution during the winter
strongly affects the way the immune system works.
And that's part of why people are more susceptible
to infections during the winter.
And this involution of both the reproductive glands
and the immune thymus gland,
this has lots of behavioral consequences.
Everyone knows about the seasonal affective disorder
or winter sickness in which depression
and weight gain become so common
during the winter, long nights.
And melatonin is the main thing
that causes involution of the thymus gland and gonads.
The original studies were done
with extracts of the pineal gland,
but you get effectively the same thing just with melatonin.
- So what about different parts of the world?
You know, like if someone was in Hawaii.
- Yep, the seasonal changes don't exist near the equator.
- So their thymus and...
- Yeah, you don't have the winter sickness
or winter immune disturbance.
- Okay, you're listening to Ask Your Obloxer,
KMUD Galbraith 91.1 FM.
From now to later clock,
callers are invited to call in questions
either related to what we've been talking about so far
from GABA to melatonin,
to the various mitochondrial issues.
Number here is 391, sorry, 923-3911,
or 1-800-KMUD-RAD.
That's 1-800-568-3723.
Okay, Dr. Peat, I had some articles
that I was reading this afternoon
whilst putting this together
to see if this was gonna be something
that we were gonna be supporting
or helping people discourage the use of,
'cause I know melatonin's use along with serotonin
is very popular, but not always a good thing.
I did read the papers,
and again, there was conflicting information on PubMed.
Some of the information was saying, for example,
that melatonin suppresses tumor aerobic metabolism,
which is the kind of Warburg effect
that Otto Warburg described.
And some of them said that melatonin
was actually pro-cancerous.
How do you see that?
- Some of that varies with the variety of mouse
that they're using, for example.
In some studies, they've implanted an extra pineal gland
or used melatonin.
Sometimes it decreases tumors.
Sometimes it increases them.
The effect on the immune system partly depends on the dose.
And when you're using a thousand-fold variation in doses,
that's the first thing you have to think of.
What's actually happening physiologically
in the normal range?
A lot of studies are getting anti-inflammatory
and antioxidant effects,
but at least two groups,
one in China and one in Denver,
are seeing very clear pro-inflammatory effects
from physiological amounts of melatonin.
- There you go.
Okay, so--
- It doesn't seem like you'd want to be taking
something that triggers the wintertime response.
- That's what I've always thought.
In our hamster lab,
we noticed that even though the lab was supposedly
well-insulated and temperature-controlled
and had a 12-hour light and dark cycle,
the hamsters during the winter
had essentially no thymus gland.
That was one of the things that started me thinking
about the potential risk of
changing your whole endocrine system
by supplementing something like that.
- Okay, we have a caller on the air,
so let's take this first caller here.
See, caller, where are you from?
You're on the air?
I think your engine is waving around.
I'm not too sure what's going on.
We have a caller on the air, though, but go ahead.
Yeah, I think--
- Caller, you're on.
You can speak up.
- Okay, so someone needs to find out how to get that going
'cause we do have a caller,
but they're not coming through at the moment, so.
Okay, well, until we get this caller back,
let's just ask you about the,
I think you did mention this early on,
but just to reiterate,
again, I had read some information about melatonin
potentially helping in radiation oncology treatments
where people get radiotherapy.
What do you think about that in terms of
its negative effects that we've heard about?
Actually, let's hold it there before we go any further.
Let's take this caller whilst they're on the air.
Let's take 'em, where are you from, caller?
Okay, we're getting messed around here.
Might be something to do with the pledge drive
and all the calls coming in to pour money
into the studio to keep us going.
Okay, so Dr. Peat, what do you think about
the use of melatonin in radiotherapy, perhaps?
- If you're bound to have the radiation,
I think that the very large doses of melatonin
are probably very protective against that damaging effect.
The trouble with using it for treating tumors
is that you can kill off all of the actual bulk cells
of the tumor, which are really defective
and weak cancer cells that are in the normal tumor.
They're being replaced very quickly.
And when you kill them off,
you irritate the region where the tumor was
and stimulate that region's ability
to recruit new repair cells.
And those cells zoom into the irradiated area
and recreate the tumor,
because you haven't cured the organism's problem.
- Because it is a very,
and I'll just say the last word on melatonin.
The only reason I was asking for its use in radiotherapy
was that it's potently antioxidant.
And like you said, potentially for what it is
and what it's capable of structurally,
it's very good at mopping up free radical damage
causing compounds.
So I think that was some of the reason
for the research that was done on it.
Okay, well, let's move on to,
I've got a few other things I wanted to ask you about.
And I know you know, as usual, you know plenty about it.
I didn't even know that you had looked at it,
but I know I'd spoken to you a while back here
and you'd mentioned what you had known.
So Rhodiola rosea is a crassula,
so that kind of a fleshy,
thick, fleshy-leaved succulent type of plant.
I didn't realize that it's actually been used
for about 3,500 years.
It was first mentioned 13th century BC
and in the Greek Bronze Age.
And then there was documentation,
plenty of documentation about the Vikings
using it to enhance physical strength and endurance.
And then obviously lots of Chinese data
about the emperor sending expeditions to Siberia
to bring back this golden root,
which is its common name for medical preparations.
And then I know we talked about adaptogens in the past,
but this is another one of those kind of golden adaptogens
that was discovered in '47,
the term adaptogen by the Russian scientist Nikolai Lazarev,
who coined that fact.
And then Dr. Lazarev was also a mentor of Dr. Breckman,
who conducted extensive research on adaptogenic herbs.
So Rhodiola rosea, in terms of it being an adaptogen,
being a physical enhancement,
a cognitive enhancer, anti-cancer.
Do you know much about Rhodiola
and perhaps how you'd see that being supportive
in terms of mitochondrial protection or anti-stress?
- Yeah, I happen to be studying
the progesterone family of steroids
around the same time I was running into ginseng
and Rhodiola research.
And Hans Selye had the concept of catotoxic steroids,
he called them.
- Catotoxic?
- Catotoxic, they destroyed the toxin effect.
And it isn't exactly the same as detoxifying,
but they protect the organism
by blocking the effect of a toxin.
And I think that's one of the effects of the adaptogens.
They have some steroids that are analogous
to progesterone and testosterone
in that catotoxic or stress-blocking effect.
And a Russian heart researcher, Felix Mayerson,
was continuing Hans Selye's concept of stress
and adapting to stress
and applying it on the mitochondrial level,
which Hans Selye never really focused very much on.
But Mayerson's idea was that we have many layers
of stress-limiting signals and hormones and processes
and it happens that the steroids
are one major stress-limiting system
where cortisol and serotonin and nitric oxide and estrogen
activate the short-term stress reactions
that can stimulate brief defense.
If those continue, they destroy the organism.
So you need a stress-ending process.
And that's where the progesterone,
testosterone, pregnenolone come in
and things that turn off the nitric oxide
and serotonin and estrogen.
And it happens that these plants
not only have the steroid level of stress-limiting factors,
but many other types of substances,
the polyphenols and flavonoids, for example,
specifically turn off nitric oxide production
and limit the excitatory serotonin pathway, for example,
which turns on cortisol.
- I want to ask you about that
in relation to red compounds too,
but we do have a caller on the air.
- Let's try again.
Caller, you're on the airwave, on third time lucky.
- San Francisco, California.
Welcome to the show.
What's your question for Dr. Peat?
- Hi, Dr. Peat.
I wanted to know what causes tooth decay
and how do you reverse it?
- What causes what?
- Tooth decay.
- Oh, I think it's stress-related.
There is one type of cavity
that starts with a dark area,
or just, I think the stress one starts with a white area
rather than the usual dark area,
and it comes on very fast
with the mobilization of calcium
from the dentine under the influence of stress.
Another kind is related to stress
starting from the outside
with the mobilization of calcium
because of imbalances
and pro-inflammatory factors in the saliva.
So the basic thing is to keep your energy up
and stress low so that you don't
have either harmful saliva
or an internal anti-calcium system.
And vitamin D and vitamin K
are very important for putting calcium into the,
keeping it in the heart tissue.
Serotonin, in the last three or four years,
has been found to be a major calcium disruptor
in the bones and teeth as well.
So it's really a matter of your total systemic health
more than just what happens in your mouth.
- Wow, thank you very much.
- Thank you for your caller, caller.
Okay, well, I guess we have time.
If it's eight minutes to eight, let's just see.
We'll let people know anyway.
Otherwise, we'll carry on here for the next eight minutes.
But if you're in the area, the number's 923-3911.
Or if you're outside the area,
there's a toll-free number, 1-800-KMUDRAD,
or 1-800-568-3723.
So we've got about five minutes or so
before we need to wrap up.
- So Dr. Peat, I wanted to ask you about hypericin,
you know, the red oil from St. John's Wort that you can make.
I remember you saying something to me
about red compounds are very antioxidant
and protective.
- Yeah, that is a big polycyclic molecule
that the reason it's red is that it is,
the electrons resonate and absorb a lot of light.
And that makes it analogous to the molecules
such as in cascara, imodin, or in aloe,
and in the tetracycline antibiotics,
and the tricyclic antidepressant,
antiserotonin, antihistamine agent.
- How about Pau d'Arco?
There's a dark root and Catawaba bark is a--
- Yeah, exactly that same type of polycyclic molecule.
I think it's analogous to the stabilizing
multi-ring steroid molecules.
They have a kind of geometric stabilizing action
on the microstructure of the cell,
as well as the electronic withdrawing effect.
When a cell is stressed and its voltage goes down,
the local electrons, in effect, are concentrated.
They become very active and reduce or attack molecules
that they shouldn't be acting on.
When you don't have enough oxygen,
you get loose electrons that cause mischief
all through the cell.
- That's what we term free radical reaction?
- Yeah.
- Okay, now, Eubiquinone is another one
of those structural molecules,
similar to the structures that are formed by the compounds
that give those dark red pigments.
Eubiquinone, and then I was gonna ask you about Bio-PQ-Q,
which seems to be the latest kid on the block
in terms of the most potent antioxidant
and mitochondrial stimulator going.
It's kind of another form of Eubiquinone.
- Yeah, I'm not sure how important it is
to have the most potent antioxidant.
- Well, in marketing, it's very important, but that's--
- The vitamin K happens to stabilize Eubiquinone.
And all of these things work in a system.
So when you're using vitamin C,
it is in an oxidized form that keeps vitamin E
in the right condition, and these and progesterone
keep Eubiquinone and vitamin K in the right system.
It's a much more organized system
on the small molecule level than the big molecule
people usually recognize.
- Okay, all right, so B vitamins, very quickly here.
In terms of mitochondria, I know we've mentioned here
CoQ10, Eubiquinone, and BioPQQ,
if people want to take a look at that and whatever research.
- Doesn't CoQ10 stabilize the vitamin K?
- Yeah, that's right.
- They work together with the mitochondria.
- So the B vitamins are also very important
in terms of electronic stability.
- Yeah, keeping the cell pretty free of lactate,
because lactate represents the shift
towards loose electrons that get in trouble.
- Right, okay, and then--
- Buffalo liver pate.
(laughing)
For your B vitamins.
- We do like buffalo liver pate, by the way.
And then the antioxidants, obviously,
things like vitamin C and vitamin E.
We've already mentioned those in plenty
of different instances where they're important.
Well, Dr. Peat, thank you so much for joining us.
I know we didn't get, we got one caller.
I think it probably, I'm not too sure why.
Sometimes it's lots, sometimes it's not many,
but anyway, I know the show's gonna get listened to
on the web and on the audio archives,
and I know lots of people call me later.
I get several weeks or months, even,
people telling me how they listen to this and that show.
So it's recorded there for future history,
as long as our species exists, put it that way.
So thanks so much for your time, Dr. Peat.
- Okay, thank you.
- Thank you, good night.
- Okay, so for those people who've found the show
this evening for the first time,
Dr. Raymond Peat has got a wealth of information
on his website, that is www.raypeat.com.
Plenty of scholarly articles, fully referenced.
He's always writing articles,
so usually every month he produces a newsletter.
I'm not too sure how subscription to that's going.
I think at one point he stopped it
'cause it was getting out of control,
but I'm not too, people should definitely ask him
if it's still available, though don't take my word for it.
I think things may have improved a little,
but I know he's a very busy person, so.
- Just check his website.
- Yeah, just check his website.
Okay, and we can also be reached toll free,
1-888-WBMER, Monday through Friday, nine to five.
And my name's Andrew Murray,
until the third of, the third Friday of next month.
Have a good night.
- My name's Sarah Johanneson Murray, and good night.
And before, I wanna make sure that we gave Ray Peat's email,
I mean, website, www.raypeat.com.
And our website is www.westernbotanicalmedicine.com.
Thank you for listening.
Thank you.